[AUDIO LOGO]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> We've seen Whitfield Diffie's
system for sending a secure
code across a distance.
We've also seen
John Dee's system
for sending a secure
code across time.
And deep down, their
concepts turn out
to be the same, which
shouldn't really
be a surprise because
distance and time, according
to Einstein, are
essentially the same thing.
Space, time.
Diffie's invention caused
a paradigm shift that
literally changed the world.
Dee's invention,
once recognized,
is going to cause
a similar paradigm
shift in the world's perception
of who Shakespeare really was.
Sure, right now when
we hear his name,
we don't think science or
astronomical equations.
We think plays
and poetry, right?
Yet his plays and poetry are
actually full of references
to stars, moon, sun,
comets, eclipses.
We've just assumed
for four centuries
that he's only using
those words poetically.
But what if that's not the case?
Why on Earth would Edward
de Vere, the Earl of Oxford,
sometimes called just
Oxford for short,
go to the trouble of enlisting
his friend, John Dee,
greatest cryptographer
at the time,
to devise such a mathematically
elegant system of sending
a secret message to posterity?
To us?
Why not just write it
on a piece of parchment,
sign it, tape it to the
underside of the altar?
It will still be
found eventually.
No need to jump through
all these hoops.
Unless the numbers themselves
and the patterns they form
are as important as
the inner message
they are wrapped around.
Quantum physicists
today are verifying
what the ancient philosophers
have always said.
On the surface it looks like
we live in a world made up
of all these different
elements, but deep down,
hydrogen, helium, lithium,
beryllium, boron, carbon,
nitrogen, oxygen, they're
just different numbers
of electrons, combinations
of the same one thing,
that elusive God Particle.
Isn't that what Shakespeare's
saying in "The Tempest,"
"We are such stuff as
dreams are made of?"
And in "Twelfth Night" when
he has a drunkard and a clown
say four times, "It's all one."
The message is the code.
And the question
should not really
be, who was Shakespeare,
but what was he,
she, they, whoever this
mysterious entity was?
Whether you're presently a
believer in the Stratford story
or are already curious
about the alternatives,
I should warn you,
it's even bigger
than anything either
side has yet to imagine.
And our preconceptions
about the writer,
that small screen
black-and-white grainy
film that's playing in our
collective consciousness
right now, is about to explode
into widescreen technicolor
surround sound like that
moment in "Wizard of Oz"
that changed cinema forever.
Because in this story, there's
a real wizard, Dr. John Dee.
He was the leading mathematician
and cryptographer of the age,
astronomer, navigator,
Hebrew expert,
Queen Elizabeth's astrologer,
and super spy in Europe,
code number 007.
He documented years
of seances in which he
was conversing with angels.
Now whether they were what
we today think of as angels,
or, let's say, extradimensional
beings, whatever they were,
they certainly were helping
Dee with his mission
to create a cryptographic
masterpiece whose purpose was
to hide the true
story of the greatest
cover-up in literary
history and pass it on
securely across time
so that it could
be revealed once the world
was ready to fully receive it.
And that time is now.
The secret has been
decoded, and I assure you,
you'll never think of
the artist formerly known
as Shakespeare in quite
the same way ever again.
The game is afoot.
I was first introduced to this
Dee rabbit hole by a friend,
Michael Dunn, who invited
me to his one-man show,
"Sherlock Holmes Solves
the Shakespeare Mystery."
He grew up in a
nearly bookless town
as the son of parents who
could neither read nor write.
For that matter, he
never taught his children
to read or write either.
I went, as one does, to
support a friend, but really
reluctantly.
My whole life, I had never had
the least interest in the man
we English call The Bard.
It just means poet, but
in England, he's The Poet.
Like many people, I had a
block about the costumes
and the arcane language
and how they all
speak as though they have
hot potatoes in their mouths.
Nevertheless, I went to
my friend's performance,
and within the
first few minutes,
I was utterly
hooked by that list
of anomalies we were
never told about
and the obvious
cover-up they implied.
I knew immediately this was the
story I had been waiting for.
I had to write it as a musical.
I figured I'd spend a
year researching, writing,
18 months tops.
But the more I learned,
the deeper the story
grew until it
couldn't be contained
within one singular,
sensational, theatrical
experience.
It needed to be a novel, a
trilogy, part-historical drama,
part-modern day
espionage thriller.
I had the whole story mapped
out right up to the final scene
where my heroine
solves a bunch of codes
and wraps up the whole mystery
with a big red bow-- ta-da!
But at the time I knew nothing
about Renaissance codes
and I figured, well, I
should at least read up
on how they actually
did codes back then.
So while I was at it, I decided
to go to Stratford and see
the church for myself.
So I did the tour,
took some pictures,
came back home with a rubbing
of Shakespeare's gravestone,
stuck it on my wall.
And all the while, furiously
reading up on John Dee,
he's this master cryptographer.
He used a grid method
called Equidistant Letter
Sequencing or ELS.
It's a system that puts the
letters of a text into a grid
so it then reveals hidden
messages vertically.
I happened to compare
the rubbing I'd
bought with photos that I'd
taken of the actual gravestone
and I noticed a problem.
The rubbing had only a period
where the actual gravestone
had a comma.
It'd turn out, I had
stumbled quite by accident
upon something no biography of
Dee seems to have ever noticed,
that he expanded
on the ELS system
by creating grids that could
give one solution by excluding
punctuation and another by
including punctuation, and more
amazing yet, they
complemented each other.
This revelation, brought
about by the missing
dot on the rubbing,
literally shook my world
and opened up almost two
decades so far of stunning codes
and solutions, and I'm really
excited to share it with you.
So the first thing
is you need a sense
of the layout of the church
and where the key touchstones
are that we'll be looking at
in detail to solve the puzzle.
This picture was taken during
dress rehearsal for the music
concert I gave at
the Stratford Church.
Shakespeare's gravestone
is right behind the piano.
Its text is cryptic.
It's heavily
suggesting a cipher.
It doesn't even have
Shakespeare's name on it.
That's touchstone number one.
Shakespeare's monument is
on the wall above my head.
Its text is even more
suggestive of a code.
The Latin lines are
grammatically wrong.
The English hardly
makes any sense at all.
So that's touchstone number two.
And a few yards behind me is
the Holy of Holies altar stone.
It, too, is very suspicious.
But hey, I brought
it back with me
so you could see for yourself.
Just kidding.
Let's go have a look at it.
Every consecrated
Catholic altar stone
has to have five
crosses on its surface
representing Christ's
stigmata wounds.
When I first examined the
one in Shakespeare's church,
I saw it had only three.
But I also discovered a false
cross of a different size
and style cut into the
front side of the stone that
should not be there.
So right away there's a
lot of mystery surrounding
this 800-year-old holy relic.
Not least of which
is the fact it
was not even there during
Shakespeare's lifetime.
It had been hidden deep
in the church catacombs
at the start of Henry
VIII's Reformation.
The ancient entrance
to the catacombs
is still marked by a
cross on this flagstone
outside the church.
We don't know how far
these medieval tunnels
go underground-- they could
be anywhere within this area,
but we do know the altar
stone was not found deep
in those ancient
crumbling tunnels,
but just inches below the
stone slab flooring here
in 1889, hidden beneath
someone else's altar
tomb in the south
cross aisle transept.
Clearly it had been
deliberately moved
from the hard-to-access
tunnels to a place where
they knew it would easily be
found eventually, which it was.
They cleaned it
up, reinstated it
in the most sacred spot in
the church where we see it
today, next to the gravestone
and the monument and my piano.
The solution I showed
Diffie states clearly,
this altar stone is where
Shakespeare has left the answer
to the puzzle, which, of course,
was why I was there that day
setting up this huge banner to
obscure the view of the altar
as we prepared to radar scan it.
But we're getting
ahead of ourselves.
In order to fully comprehend
the codes you're about to see,
we need to refresh our memories
as to what happened on Mt.
Sinai nearly 3 and 1/2
thousand years ago.
Cast your minds back.
After the Lord speaks to Moses
from the burning bush telling
him to deliver a
message to the elders,
Moses asks, "Who
shall I say sent me?"
And the Lord answers,
Ehyeh Asher Ehyeh,
which translates as,
"I am that I am."
It's the first time in the
Bible that the name of God
is revealed by the Lord himself.
Each word starts with the first
letter of the Hebrew alphabet,
aleph, and in a
simple cipher that
was well-known during
Shakespeare's day,
the alphabet is revolved so
that the first letter, aleph,
becomes the last letter,
tav, mimicking what Christ
said in Hebrew, "I am the
aleph tav," the beginning
and the end.
Thus, the three alephs
become three tavs,
and their Greek
equivalent, three towers.
These three letters were adopted
by Royal Arch Freemasonry
and are known as the Triple Tau.
They allude to the three crosses
at Calvary which, as we know,
were just simple tau crosses.
The three Ts were compressed
into a symbol wherein
all are joined at the base
and surrounded by the shape
we know today as
the Star of David,
but which was originally
Seal of Solomon.
The connected Ts
also resemble a T-H,
which, for Freemasons,
holds three sacred meanings
represented by Latin phrases.
Keys to the treasure, place
where the precious thing
is concealed, and First Temple
of Jerusalem, Solomon's Temple.
Do you see a Triple Tau symbol
anywhere on the gravestone?
It's not even encoded, it's
right there in plain sight
under the name Jesus.
These Ys are printer's thorns,
an old English shortcut
for the letters T-H.
So these lines actually
read, "Blessed be the man
that spares these stones
and cursed be he
that moves my bones."
What about actual T-H letters?
Well, there's one on
each side, but they're
not separate T and H letters.
They're connected just
like the Triple Tau symbol.
Printers call this a ligature.
So altogether,
including the Y thorns,
the gravestone has five T-Hs
representing the five stigmata
wounds of Christ.
Are there any T-Hs
in the monument?
Yeah.
There are 10 and every
pair is ligature, once
again mimicking that
Triple Tau symbol.
But there's also another
pair of unusual ligatures,
N-E and M-E. So
what is it saying?
"I am that I am,"
me, but all caps.
Important distinction.
The real self me.
Notice the T-Hs are
in two distinct groups
of four and six, so
there's a pattern
of groups reading four
to six, left to right,
or six to four, read
backwards Hebraic fashion.
So we have Freemasonic T-H
ligatures in the gravestone
and in the monument,
both of which
have cryptic text
suggesting a cipher.
We don't have to look far to
find touchstone number three.
It's the dedication page of
Shakespeare's sonnets, which
is all extremely cryptic text.
Notice, first of
all, it's structured
as three inverted triangles
of six lines, two lines, four
lines.
Same pattern as the
monument ligatures.
In 1997, the late Oxfordian
scholar, John Rollett,
was the first to
notice that if you
Count the sixth word, the
second, the fourth, and so on--
6, 2, 4, 6, 2, it
reveals a sentence.
These sonnets all by
ever the fourth T. "Ever"
was an obvious anagram of
"vere," suggesting the leading
alternate Shakespeare
candidate, Edward de Vere 17th
Earl of Oxford, whose name also
contains the 6-2-4 pattern.
But Rollett couldn't figure
out what the fourth T meant
and he abandoned the search.
In 2002, another Oxfordian
scholar, Art Neuendorffer,
thought that since the three
T crosses represent Calvary,
the fourth T might mean
the fourth tau cross,
the fourth person crucified
after Calvary in Christ's name,
and that was St. Peter
who asked to be crucified
upside-down saying, he
was not worthy of dying
the same way as his Lord.
Neuendorffer suspected an ELS
grid might reveal an answer
and used the standard
method excluding punctuation
that works like this.
Just flow the first 10
letters in, and then the next,
and so on.
You could do this with any
grid you wish of course.
This is a five-grid,
this is a 14.
He tried a 19-grid and found a
triple tau with an inverted tau
cross next to it spelling
the name "De Vere."
A very promising
start that seemed
to support Rollett's
discovery and confirm
"Vere," the Earl of Oxford,
as the author of the sonnets.
Strangely, neither
he nor Rollett
followed up any further.
But I saw their work shortly
after I started researching
John Dee and that helped me find
something even deeper in it,
because in Dee's great
cryptologic masterpiece,
the "Monas Hieroglyphica,"
he clearly tells us he uses
punctuation-- dots--
as part of his
unique coding method.
He states, "In it there be
not even one superfluous dot
and not one dot wanting."
So the fact that every word
in the sonnet's dedication
is followed by a dot told me,
this had to be Dee's work.
I started by looking for other
occurrences of the Triple Tau
and Vere inverted cross.
I put the gravestone text
into every possible grid
and discovered
there's only one where
you find a triple tau next to
an inverted tau cross spelling
the name Veres, as
in belonging to Vere.
I did the same with
the monument text
and found there's only one there
that has a triple tau balanced
against an inverted tau cross
spelling E Vere for Edward.
So it looked like I
was onto something.
It had the consistency of a
definite repetitive system.
I dove deeper into
the gravestone.
Besides the triple
tau and Vere's cross,
I saw ears and eyes
perfectly balanced
against each other like
Freemasonic T squares.
Well, here's Queen
Elizabeth in one
of her favorite gowns
covered in ears and eyes.
She's basically telling the
world, don't mess with me,
I've got my spies everywhere.
Well, Elizabeth's chief
spy in Europe was Dee.
He was literally the ears
and eyes of Her Majesty.
But he's gone even
further and actually
signed his work
with two pillars,
like the Boaz and Jachin pillars
at the entrance to Solomon's
Temple, Dee and Dee.
But here's the kicker.
His code number,
007, how brilliant!
O-O-DEE in the
shape of a number 7.
We're going to see a lot
more of these signatures
and his great sense of
humor, but there's more.
Dee was communing
with angels in seances
for over a decade in
England and Europe.
One of the most important
of those sessions
took place in Krakow,
Poland in 1584.
A coded transmission
was delivered to Dee
during a long session that
started on June 24, 624.
The angels gave
precise instructions
to put all the letters into four
quadrants, and as you can see,
Dee marked the grid himself.
There are precisely 624 spaces.
The document is called
The Enochian Tables,
and of course, it's
the private red key
that you saw in the
previous episode.
And the public yellow
key was the three grids
I've just shown you.
So let's recap.
Dee created three
separate grids.
Sonnets' dedication,
monument, and gravestone
all excluding punctuation.
But The Enochian Tables were
divinely inspired and uploaded
to Dee by angelic beings.
I had a hunch he was
using dots as a way
to create other
grids that would add
extra meaning to
the first messages,
so I counted the punctuation
and characters in all three
to see if they led to the
next step in the puzzle.
So, Sonnets' dedication,
including all characters
and dots, total 178.
Monument, all characters
and punctuation, 332.
Gravestone, all characters
and punctuation, 113.
Overall total, 623.
What?
Impossible!
If it had been out
by five or six,
I'd have admitted my hunch
was wrong, but out by one?
There had to be a mistake.
Somewhere-- and
then I realized, I
was using the rubbing
of the gravestone which,
of course, is wrong.
It has a single dot
instead of a colon.
This is the moment
I absolutely knew
I got his methodology down.
Clearly he was using
the colon like a null,
as a way of filling two
separate spaces when necessary.
Bingo.
The true total for
all three is 624.
There couldn't be a
clearer invitation
to match the 624 characters
of the three touchstones
against the 624 characters
of The Enochian Tables.
However, just laying
them over each other
is only the first step.
You need a master key to
know what points to what.
I looked deeper into
Royal Arch Masonry
and I discovered
that members are
awarded this
Companion's Jewel when
they reach a certain level.
It's a Seal of Solomon again
within a circle of gold,
and at the bottom is a Latin
phrase, "Nil nisi clavis
deest," which means, "Nothing
is wanting but the key."
And the key, of course, is
the T-H symbol in the center.
That's it.
The Sonnets'
dedication is signed,
T. T., the initials of the
publisher, Thomas Thorpe,
but of course, that's a
clue hiding in plain sight,
isn't it?
He's really Th-omas Th-orpe.
T-H, T-H. The master
key is, in fact,
the double T of his sign-off.
And there are just five
sets of the double Ts
that point across from
the Sonnets' dedication,
gravestone, and monument, to the
letters in The Enochian Tables
that reveal a message--
"living page."
But the part that
shocked Diffie was
that the master key, five
sets of double T's, is also
in The Enochian Tables.
Now, this is where to fully
comprehend the system,
it can take 18 years because
you don't suspect at first
that it's going to be much more
than just a new and improved
ELS system.
But it's so much more.
It migrates across all
Shakespeare's works
because he can't
resist putting clues
into seemingly unrelated
scenes in the plays.
You end up having
to read them all
to recognize that it's always
little moments, usually
comedic, that seem
to have nothing
to do with the main storyline.
Like he's just
putting in a slapstick
routine for a
little light relief.
But they're always
secret hidden references
to the overall bigger puzzle
of the Shakespeare mystery.
One such scene is where
Malvolio in "Twelfth Night"
is reading a letter
that contains a code.
It occurs at the
very top of page 264
where we read,
"No man must know.
No man must know.
What follows?
The numbers altered.
No man must know."
And sure enough, you look
across and the number
has been altered.
273 instead of 265.
Further down he reads,
"M.O.A.I. doth sway my life,"
and does some juggling of the
letters which he observes all
occur in his own name.
It's a subtle nod
to Juliet's "What's
in a name" because he sees
it as a partial anagram
of his own name but he
just can't work it out.
In fact, it's never
solved in the play.
It's supposed to be
solved by us in the bigger
play within the play.
Further down and drawing
attention to itself in italics,
he reads, "If this fall
into thy hand, revolve."
Well, if we revolve the
letters, we get I-A-O-M,
and my good friend,
Professor Michael Delahoyde,
who teaches Shakespeare at
Washington State University,
pointed out to me that IAOM
is the Freemasons' most sacred
password given only
under strictest secrecy.
I remember thinking, could
it really be that simple?
It's page 264, after
all, the nearest
he can get to a page 624 or 426
as the sections in the folio
don't go that high.
Are we supposed to just
revolve The Enochian Tables?
Well, turns out,
that's exactly what
we're being instructed to do.
And now the double
T's in both directions
are pointing to completely
different letters,
but back at their
own private codes--
Diffie colored
paint analogy again.
And when mixed together, they
give messages three and four--
"I have hewn desiderata."
The whole solution is a
Shakespearean rhyming couplet
in iambic tetrameter form.
It says, "Living
page, yo stigmata,
I have hewn desiderata."
In modern parlance, it
says, "As a living page,
a preserved record kept alive."
"Yo," a middle English word
that means, "Look closely at."
"Stigmata," Christ's wounds.
There the crosses carved into
a consecrated altar stone where
"I have hewn," cut into
stone, "desiderata,"
Latin for my desires,
"What I want you to know."
All of which points
us to the altar stone
known as the Holy of Holies.
We've seen the Seal of
Solomon now in two places.
Why are we being led
to Solomon's Temple
and the Holy of Holies?
Here's the temple layout.
Remember, Solomon's Temple,
keys to the treasure,
place where the precious
thing is concealed, all T-Hs.
So the place where the
precious thing is concealed,
the Ark is the Holy of Holies.
And the Hebrew word for
it is pronounced D'Vere,
from the root word, "devarim,"
which means "words."
So when Polonius asks Hamlet,
"What you read, my Lord?"
And Hamlet, feigning
madness, says, "Words.
Words.
Words."
He's actually telling us the
root of his name, D'Vere,
D'Vere, D'Vere.
Oxford must be
laughing his tights
off watching this drama
unfold from wherever he is.
Talk about a play within
a play within a play.
He supposedly died
on June 24, 624--
that's according to
the historical record.
Want to bet?
What are the odds of him dying
on the very day the codes are
all about?
Well, it's nowhere near as
good as the spin of a roulette
wheel.
It's about 10 times
that, 365 to 1.
William Shakspere was
baptized on April 26, 426.
What are the odds of
him being baptized
on the very day the
codes are all about?
Well, that's the same, isn't it?
365 to 1.
But the odds of
these both happening
by sheer coincidence, the
beginning of Shakspere's life
and the end of the real
Shakespeare's life,
you need to multiply
these together.
It's 133,000 to 1.
The Enochian Tables,
the Rosetta Stone
for decrypting this
whole mystery so far,
was delivered by angels
to Dee on June 24, 624.
And it has exactly
624 squares in it.
That's another 365
to 1 coincidence.
Odds are now over
48 million to 1.
Figure in that Oxford
died 20 years to the day
after the angels delivered the
very code he was told to use.
That's now over
350 trillion to 1.
I think you get the picture.
The proof is in the
magic of the math.
In the next episode,
we'll explore
some of the many
other "coincidences"
of this puzzle, the mathematical
probabilities of which are just
as extreme.
There is essentially zero chance
of this being coincidental.
These are secure messages sent
across time specifically to us.
And they're accompanied by even
more elegant codes that further
confirm two brilliant
geniuses guiding us
with a system that can only be
called a combination of math
and poetry--
math-o-etics.
An unheard-of level of
cryptographic sophistication
that will ultimately
deliver us the
answer to what they hid inside
this alter stone and why.
[MUSIC PLAYING]